Classical review part i (#106)
mlsa-book/MLSA: book/P3C13_classical.qmd

The log-partial likelihood, usually prefered for optimization, is given by
<!--  -->
$$
\mathcal{lPL}(\beta) = \sum_{k=1}^m \left(\eta_{i(\tbk)} - \log \left(\sum_{j \in \calR_{\tbk}} \exp(\eta_j)\right)\right),
$${#eq-lpartial}
<!--  -->
such that 
<!--  -->
$$
\hat{\bsbeta} = \argmax_{\bsbeta}\ \mathcal{lPL}(\bsbeta).
$${#eq-estimate-beta}

Traditionally, $\hat{\bsbeta}$ is obtained using numerical optimization methods, such as Newton-Raphson or Fisher-Scoring, which require derivation of the first and second deriviatives of @eq-lpartial. But any suitable optimization routine can be used. 

Importantly, the partial likelihood allows us to estimate covariate effects (and interpret them in terms of hazard ratios) without making any assumptions about the underlying distribution of event times.
Obtaining $\hat{\bsbeta}$  also gives us enough information to make predictions in the form of relative risks (@sec-survtsk). 

At this point, however, we don't have an estimate of the baseline hazard $h_0$ and thus cannot make survival distribution predictions.

> The Breslow estimator [@Breslow1972; @linBreslowEstimator2007] provides a way to obtain an estimate of the cumulative baseline hazard, $H_0$, using the covariate effect estimates obtained from @eq-lpartial:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Breslow estimator [@Breslow1972; @linBreslowEstimator2007] provides a way to obtain an estimate of the cumulative baseline hazard, $H_0$, using the parameters from the Cox model:
```

<!--  -->
$$
H_{Bres}(\tau) = H_0(\tau) = \sum_{k:\tbk \leq \tau} \frac{d_{\tbk}}{\sum_{j \in \calR_{\tbk}} \exp(\eta_j)}.
$$ {#eq-breslow}
<!--  -->
Note that if the value for all covariates or their effects was zero, or if there were no covariates, then the Breslow estimator is identical to the Nelson-Aalen estimator (@sec-surv-na):

$$
H_{Bres}(\tau) = \sum_{k:\tbk \leq \tau} \frac{d_{\tbk}}{\sum_{j \in \calR_{\tbk}} 1} = \sum_{\tbk \leq \tau} \frac{d_{\tbk}}{n_{\tbk}} = H_{NA}(\tau).
$$

With these formulae, the Cox PH model can be used as a predictive model by using training data to estimate $\hat{\bsbeta}$ via (@eq-estimate-beta).
These fitted coefficients are used to predict $\hat{\bseta}$ for new observations and finally the cumulative baseline hazard is computed with (@eq-breslow) to return a predicted distribution, for example the survival probability (@eq-ph-surv).

<!-- FIXME -->
The Cox model is is highly interpretable and has a long history of usage in clinical prediction modelling and analysis.
However, the proportional hazards assumption is often violated in real life, leaving the model to be a questionable choice when used for data analysis or inference.

> Nevertheless, years fo research have developed extensions of the cox model [@therneau2001modelingsurvival] that can incorporate stratified baseline hazards (the PH assumption only has to hold within strata), time-varying effects (the effects of time-constant covariates change over time) and time-varying covariates (the values of covariates change over time),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Over the years, extensions to the Cox model have been developed [@therneau2001modelingsurvival] to incorporate stratified baseline hazards (the PH assumption only has to hold within strata), time-varying effects (the effects of time-constant covariates change over time) and time-varying covariates (the values of covariates change over time).
```

> though, especially in case of time-varying covariates, it is difficult to make meaningful and interpretable predictions (as the values of covariates might not be known at the time of prediction).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, especially in case of time-varying covariates, it is difficult to make meaningful and interpretable predictions (as the values of covariates might not be known at the time of prediction).
```

Whilst violation of the PH assumption can be problematic, especially for interpretation of covariate effects, it doesn't appear to cause problems in terms of prediction accuracy.
In fact, the Cox model often outperforms machine learning alternatives, including those that relax the PH assumption [@Burk2025; @Gensheimer2018; @Luxhoj1997; @VanBelle2011b].

### Parametric PH {#sec-ph-parametric}

Semi-parametric approaches (like the Cox model) are popular because they don't make an assumption about the underlying distribution of event times, leaving the baseline hazard unspecified.
However, there are some cases where modelling a particular distribution may make sense.
On these occasions, a particular probability distribution of the event times is assumed, with three common choices [@Kalbfleisch2011; @Wang2017] being the Exponential, Gompertz, and Weibull distributions.
The Weibull distribution is particularly important as it reduces to the Exponential distribution when the shape parameter equals $1$.

> <!-- FIXME: AFT not introduced yet? -->

Reviewer: ?

and

$$

> S(\tau) = \exp(-\lambda \tau^\gamma).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
S(\tau) = \exp(-\lambda \tau^\gamma)
```

$$

Taking these to be the baseline hazard and survival functions respectively, they can be substituted into the Cox model as follows:
<!--  -->
$$

> h_{WeibullPH}(\tau|\xx_i)= (\lambda\gamma \tau^{\gamma-1}) \exp(\eta_i),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
h_{WeibullPH}(\tau|\xx_i)= (\lambda\gamma \tau^{\gamma-1}) \exp(\eta_i)
```

$$ {#eq-ph-weibull}
<!--  -->
or equivalently
<!--  -->
$$

> S_{WeibullPH}(\tau|\xx_i)= (\exp(-\lambda \tau^\gamma))^{\exp(\eta_i)}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
S_{WeibullPH}(\tau|\xx_i)= (\exp(-\lambda \tau^\gamma))^{\exp(\eta_i)}
```

$$
<!--  -->
Finally, these formulae can be used to define the full likelihood (@sec-surv-estimation-param) for the WeibullPH model (here for right-censored data):

$$
\begin{aligned}
\calL(\bstheta) &= \prod_{i=1}^n h_Y(t_i|\xx_i, \bstheta)^{\delta_i}S_Y(t_i|\xx_i, \bstheta) \\

> &= \prod_{i=1}^n \Big((\lambda\gamma t_i^{\gamma-1} \exp(\eta_i))^{\delta_i}\Big)\Big(\exp(-\lambda t_i^\gamma\exp(\eta_i))\Big),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
&= \prod_{i=1}^n \Big((\lambda\gamma t_i^{\gamma-1} \exp(\eta_i))^{\delta_i}\Big)\Big(\exp(-\lambda t_i^\gamma\exp(\eta_i))\Big)
```

$$
\begin{aligned}
\call(\bstheta) &= \sum_{i=1}^n \delta_i[\log(\lambda\gamma) + (\gamma-1)\log(t_i) + \eta_i] - \lambda t_i^\gamma\exp(\eta_i) \\

> &\propto \sum_{i=1}^n \delta_i[\log(\lambda\gamma) + \gamma\log(t_i) + \eta_i] - \lambda t_i^\gamma \exp(\eta_i).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
&\propto \sum_{i=1}^n \delta_i[\log(\lambda\gamma) + \gamma\log(t_i) + \eta_i] - \lambda t_i^\gamma \exp(\eta_i)
```

#### Cause-specific PH models {.unlisted .unnumbered}

In cause-specific models we define the hazard for cause $e$ as:

$$
h_{e}(\tau|\xx_{e;i})= h_{e;0}(\tau)\exp(\eta_{e;i}),
$${#eq-cause-specific-hazard-ph}

where $h_{e;0}$ is a cause-specific baseline hazard and $\xx_{e;i}$ is a set of cause-specific covariates (although in practice often the same covariates are used for all causes), and $\eta_{e;i}$ is the cause-specific linear predictor:
<!--  -->
$$
\eta_{e;i} = \mathbf{x}_{e;i}^T\bsbeta_e.
$$
<!--  -->
In order to estimate $\bsbeta_e$, let $\tbke, k=1,\ldots,m(e)$ be the ordered unique event times at which events of cause $e$ occur and let $i(\tbke)$ be the index of the observation that experiences the $k$th event of cause $e$. Then the cause-specific partial likelihood is given by:
<!--  -->
$$

> \calL(\bsbeta_e) = \prod_{k=1}^{m(e)} \Bigg(\frac{\exp(\eta_{e;i(\tbke)})}{\sum_{j \in \calR_{\tbke}} \exp(\eta_{e;j})}\Bigg),

Reviewer: update calL with same notation as above

$$ {#eq-breslow-cr}
<!--  -->
and the feature-dependent, cause-specific cumulative hazard (@eq-ph-cum) as 

$$
H_{e}(\tau|\xx) = H_{Bres;e}(\tau)\exp(\mathbf{x}^T\bsbeta_e)
$$ {#eq-cause-specific-cumu-hazard-cox}

Finally, in order to obtain an estimate of the cumulative incidence function $F_e(\tau)$ (@eq-cif), we need an estimate of the all cause survival probability and an estimate of the cause-specific hazard (which is not directly available in the Cox modelas the Breslow estimator only provides an estimate of the cause-specific *cumulative* baseline hazard).
The all cause survival probability is obtained using @eq-cause-specific-cumu-hazard-cox and the usual relationships (@eq-all-cause-cumu-hazard, @eq-surv-haz) as 
<!--  -->
$$
S(\tau|\xx) = \exp\left(-\sum_{e=1}^q H_{e}(\tau|\xx)\right)
$$ {#eq-all-cause-surv-prob-cox}
<!--  -->
and an estimate of the cause-specific hazard is obtained via
<!--  -->
$$
\begin{aligned}
h_{e}(\tau|\xx) = \Delta H_{e}(\tau|\xx) & = \Delta H_{Bres;e}(\tau)\exp(\mathbf{x}^T\bsbeta_e)\\
 & = \frac{d_{\tbke}}{\sum_{j \in \calR_{\tbke}} \exp(\eta_{e;j})}\exp(\mathbf{x}^T\bsbeta_e),
\end{aligned}
$$ {#eq-cause-specific-hazard-cox}

> <!--  -->

Reviewer: to discuss

where $\Delta H_{Bres;e}(\tau)$ is the increment of the cause-specific cumulative baseline hazard between successive time points.
With @eq-all-cause-surv-prob-cox and @eq-cause-specific-hazard-cox, the CIF is approximated by 
<!--  -->
$$
F_e(\tau|\xx) = \sum_{k:\tbk \leq \tau} S(\tau|\xx) h_{e}(\tau|\xx).
$$ {#eq-cif-cox}
<!--  -->

> <!-- FIXME: the below is a bit weird here, because it applies to any parametric model, not only PH -->

Reviewer: Move to reduction techniques as general procedures for EHA
